.Dd $Mdocdate: April 4 2024 $
.Dt CALLISTO 3lua
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm callisto
.Nd operating system interface for Lua programs
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Callisto provides Lua interfaces for operating system functionality.
Using Callisto, Lua programs can
manipulate the file system,
send signals to processes,
parse command line arguments,
and use other OS functionality otherwise not available to Lua.
.Pp
The Callisto libraries are not available to a standard Lua interpreter;
usually, one would access the Callisto libraries through
the standalone interpreter
.Xr csto 1 .
.Xr csto 1
behaves the same as the standalone
.Xr lua 1
interpreter;
existing Lua code will work as intended.
Before any scripts are executed,
.Xr csto 1
loads the Callisto libraries
into their global tables,
eliminating the need to call
.Fn require
on each library.
See its manual for more information.
.Pp
For up-to-date information concerning Callisto, visit
.Lk https://sr.ht/\[ti]jeremy/callisto/
in a web browser.
.Ss Libraries
To get started programming with Callisto,
see the manuals for the libraries below.
Library manuals contain a brief description of the library,
and a list of functions in that library.
Function manuals are concise and should be easy to read and understand
for anyone who has programmed in Lua before.
.Pp
The following libraries are included in Callisto:
.Bl -tag -width 1 -offset indent
{.Lbs}
.El
.Pp
Manuals for these libraries can be found in the
.Sy 3lua
section.
You may need to supply
.Ar -s3lua
to your
.Xr man 1
program
to enable searching for manuals in the
.Sy 3lua
section.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr csto 1
.Sh STANDARDS
Callisto relies heavily on functionality
provided by your POSIX-compliant operating system.
.Pp
The POSIX revision supported is
.Em IEEE Std 1003.1-2017 ("POSIX.1-2017") .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jeremy Baxter Aq Mt jtbx@disroot.org
authored and maintains the Callisto libraries.
.Sh BUGS
Known bugs can be found at the bug tracker found at
.Lk https://todo.sr.ht/\[ti]jeremy/callisto .
.Pp
If you have found a bug in Callisto,
please report it to the bug tracker or send an email to
.Aq Mt \[ti]jeremy/callisto@todo.sr.ht .
