.Dd $Mdocdate: April 1 2024 $
.Dt CSTO 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm csto
.Nd Lua interpreter with POSIX interfaces
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm csto
.Bk -words
.Op Fl EivW
.Op Fl e Ar stat
.Op Fl l Ar mod
.Op Fl l Ar g=mod
.Op Ar script Op Ar args
.Ek
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is an interpreter for the Lua programming language, bundled with the Callisto
libraries. Callisto provides Lua libraries for POSIX operating systems. These
can aid in file manipulation, process management, command line argument parsing
and other operations not available through the standard Lua library.
.Pp
All of these libraries are conveniently bundled directly into
.Nm
and do not depend on any external libraries or files, unless your copy of
.Nm
was built with support for
.Lb libreadline .
.Pp
For up-to-date information concerning Callisto, visit
.Lk https://sr.ht/\[ti]jeremy/callisto/
in a web browser.
.Pp
.Nm
executes Lua programs in source form or in bytecode form. Lua programs in
source form can be compiled to bytecode form through the program
.Xr luac 1 ,
included with the standard Lua distribution.
.Pp
After handling command line options, the Lua program in file
.Ar script
is executed with arguments
.Ar args .
These arguments are available to
.Ar script
as strings in a global table named
.Sy arg .
When called without arguments,
.Nm
behaves as if
.Fl v
and
.Fl i
were given if standard input is a terminal, and as if
.Fl
was given otherwise.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width -l_g=mod
.It Fl E
Ignore environment variables (see section
.Sx ENVIRONMENT
below).
.It Fl e Ar stat
Execute the Lua statement
.Ar stat .
.It Fl i
Enter interactive mode after executing
.Ar script .
.It Fl l Ar mod
Load library
.Ar mod
into global
.Ar mod .
.It Fl l Ar g=mod
Load library
.Ar mod
into global
.Ar g .
.It Fl v
Print version information.
.It Fl W
Enable warnings (see
.Sy warn()
in the Lua manual).
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width four
.It Ev LUA_INIT , Ev LUA_INIT_5_4
Before handling command line options and scripts,
.Nm
checks the values of
.Ev LUA_INIT_5_4
and
.Ev LUA_INIT
in that order. When
.Ev LUA_INIT_5_4
is set,
.Ev LUA_INIT
is ignored. If the contents are of the form
.Dq @filename ,
then the contents of the file
.Em filename
is executed as Lua code. Otherwise, the contents are assumed to be a Lua
statement and is executed as Lua code.
.It Ev LUA_PATH , Ev LUA_PATH_5_4
Initial value of
.Em package.path ,
the path used by
.Sy require()
to search for Lua modules.
.It Ev LUA_CPATH , Ev LUA_CPATH_5_4
Initial value of
.Em package.cpath ,
the path used by
.Sy require()
to search for C loaders.
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jeremy Baxter Aq Mt jtbx@disroot.org
authored and maintains the Callisto libraries.
.Pp
R. Ierusalimschy, L. H. de Figueiredo, and W. Celes authored the Lua
programming language and its standard libraries.
.Sh BUGS
Known bugs can be found at the bug tracker
.Lk https://todo.sr.ht/~jeremy/callisto .
.Pp
If you have discovered a bug in Callisto, please report it to the bug
tracker or send an email to
.Aq Mt ~jeremy/callisto@todo.sr.ht .
